---
layout: post
title:  "How can Apache Wave Operational Transformations be encrypted? (Part 1)"
date:   2017-06-30 16:07:03 +0200
categories: e2ee
---
[Apache Wave][wave] is a software framework for online real-time collaborative
edition. Similarly to Google Docs and Etherpad, it uses [Operational
Transformations][ot] to manage user collaboration. During this Google Summer of
Code we are providing end-to-end encryption to wave documents. This means that
only the people with access to the documents (those who have shared a symmetric
key) can edit and retreive the contents of a document, protecting in that way
the privacy of wave users.

We base our GSOC work in [this awesome paper][paper] that explains how some
researchers encrypted Google Docs' Operational Transformations. They used a
simplified model to explain how document operations (called _revisions_ in the
paper) can be encrypted.

In this blog post, we translate the paper insights to Apache Wave architecture,
on which SwellRT is based. Let's start with some basics of Apache Wave,
and what is the structure of a document. If you are already familiar with them,
you can just skip the next section.

## Documents and Operations

As [this fabulous blog post][codecommit] explains, Wave documents are well-formed
XML documents that carry additional metadata called "annotations". Annotations
are (potentially-overlapping) key/value ranges which span across specific regions of
the document and are usually used to style the text.

Documents can be modified by (and also represented as) a document operation. A
document operation is a series of components that move the cursor across the
document. Those components can be of the type:

* _insertCharacters_ — Inserts the specified string at the current index.
* _deleteCharacters_ — Deletes the specified string from the current index.
* _openElement_ — Creates a new XML open-tag at the current index.
* _deleteOpenElement_ — Deletes the specified XML open-tag from the current
  index.
* _closeElement_ — Closes the first currently-open tag at the current index.
* _deleteCloseElement_ — Deletes the XML close-tag at the current index.
* _annotationBoundary_ — Defines the changes to any annotations (starting or
  ending) at the current index.
* _retain_ — Advances the index a specified number of items.

So, the document operation `retain(8); deleteCharacters('m');
insertCharacters('M'); retain(38);` would remove the "m" at position 8 and add
an "M" in the same position.

Now we are ready to understand how to encrypt those operations.

## Encrypting Operations

In the paper, clients share a symmetric key in order to encrypt and decrypt
operations, and the server has no knowledge of it, so encryption and decryption
of operations must be carried on the client side.

The simplified model of the paper only considers two components (called primitive
operations or mutations): _insertion_ and _deletion_. Insertions insert
the text _v_ at a particular position _p_ of the document, and deletions delete
_k_ characters forward or backward, depending on if _k_ is positive or negative.
Only the inserted text is encrypted and decrypted, remaining the document
structure visible by the server.

In Wave, we have a plenty more of components, as we have seen in the previous
section. We are going to encrypt the text components only, remaining the XML format of the
document in plaintext and visible by the server. The components that deal
directly with the text are _insertCharacters_ and _deleteCharacters_, so we are
going to encrypt the text of their parameters.

When a text is encrypted, its length is usually expanded due to randomization
and integrity requirements (commonly known as initialization vector and MAC). This
represents a challange in an Operational Transformation system, in which the
length of the inserted and deleted text is something to take into account in
order to compose and transform the operations.

In the paper, it is solved by adding two more components at the end of each
operation, an insertion of the extra information, and a deletion of that
information. This is a clever approach that solves the problem, maintaining the
cursor constant between the encrypted and non-encrypted operations.

We can not use the same approach in Wave because its operations can not move the
cursor backwards as it is done in the paper (delete something that the same
operation is adding). Fortunately, we can obtain a similar effect storing the
additional text in a particular operation without moving the cursor, I am talking
about the annotations.

Using annotations to store the ciphertext, we can encrypt any operation with any
number of _insertCharacters_ and _deleteCharacters_ components, by concatenating
their texts and storing its ciphertext in the annotation. For example, for the
following operation:

`retain(8); deleteCharacters('m'); insertCharacters('M'); retain(38);`

We would concatenate all the texts as "mM", encrypt it using the shared key
obtaining something similar to:

`qOg89Tc6KjH9HyeC;6pQAClv6a8MnFoAHWsT06WIV;`

And we would add an annotation from the beginning to the end of the document
that we will strip in the decryption process.

```
annotationBoundary(changes: [
  cipher = null -> 'qOg89Tc6KjH9HyeC;6pQAClv6a8MnFoAHWsT06WIV;']);
retain(8);
deleteCharacters('*');
insertCharacters('*');
retain(38);
annotationBoundary(ends: ['cipher']);
```

Note that component parameters have been replaced by asterisks (\*) in order to
maintain a character there and do not leak any information of the underlying
text that was there.

So, now the rest of the clients can receive that operation and decrypt it by
decrypting the text of the annotation and splitting its characters among the
asterisks of the _insertCharacters_ and _deleteCharacters_ components.

This encryption and decryption process is done just before and after the Wavelet
Operations are sent to and received from the server, respectively, at a class
called StaticChannelBinder.

**UPDATE 2017-07-25:** Since Wave does not check if the deleted characters in the document
correspond to the deleted characters received as a document operation component,
we can optimize the algorithm by do not encrypting and decrypting the
_deleteCharacters_ operations. We only have to ofuscate the deleted text using
a predefined character, such as the asterisk (\*).

The code that encrypts and decrypts operations is already available in
[our repo](https://github.com/llopv/incubator-wave/tree/gsoc-2017), and a video
with the demo can be watched here:

<div style="position:relative;height:0;padding-bottom:56.25%">
<iframe src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/znxAnH8hg-c?rel=0?ecver=2"
width="640" height="360" frameborder="0"
style="position:absolute;width:100%;height:100%;left:0" allowfullscreen>
</iframe></div>


## Next steps

Now that we have designed the encryption and decryption of operations
"on-the-fly", we need clients to be able to decrypt a document that has already been
written. In order to do it, the client needs all the ciphertext from which the
current state of the document is formed of. The paper uses a smart approach to
see which operations in the history are useful for the current state of the
document, so the server could use it to send to the clients just the information
they need in order to decrypt the document, reducing the bandwidth and the
computational power needed to perform the entire replay of the whole document
history. These are the things we are going to focus on the following weeks, and
we will share them in another blog post when it will be ready.

Stage 2 of GSOC has already begun.

[wave]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apache_Wave
[ot]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operational_transformation
[codecommit]: http://www.codecommit.com/blog/java/understanding-and-applying-operational-transformation
[paper]: http://www.tara.tcd.ie/bitstream/handle/2262/68179/paper.pdf;sequence=1
